Okay, I guess the tape is rolling, so we might as well start.
First of all, I wondered how you became involved in science fiction when you were younger.
Did you read it a lot when you were young?
Yes, I started reading science fiction, I suppose, as about the earliest form of literature
that I read.
I never made a mental distinction between science fiction, fantasy, anything of that
nature, because my parents brought it to me to read, and I just simply regarded it as
the most interesting reading material that I had accessible.
So naturally, when I began turning to writing, that's what I wrote.
Why did you start writing science fiction?
Well, actually, they took my television program off the air.
Our television, at that time, I was ten.
Television hadn't been around in private homes very long.
I had just time enough to get thoroughly addicted to television science fiction, and then it ran its course,
and it was gone from the air.
So I, in a fit of mourning, went into the bedroom, picked up a tablet and pencil, and started writing my own novels.
Your first published novel, I think, was around 1976, The Gate of Iverill?
Yes, yes.
Had you published any stories before then?
No, not for want of trying, but I've never regarded myself as a short story writer.
I don't tend to sink in that convenient length, and consequently, I wrote novels and novels,
and was actually turned in Brothers of Earth first, and since there seemed to be some question about it being a little long,
as many of my works tend to be, I very, very quickly wrote Gate of Iverill while teaching school, etc.,
and managed to get it finished inside two months.
One thing I wondered is, you said that you didn't distinguish between science fiction and the other reading that you did,
but I wonder why you didn't do some other kind of writing instead of science fiction.
I think you could have been a writer in almost any area that you tried.
Well, I didn't write the other things because I didn't like them in general.
I find that I suppose the only thing outside of science fiction that I've ever tried my hand at writing has been mysteries,
and I don't care for the modern fashion of those, and I've always viewed them as a great deal more fun to read than they are to write,
mostly because you have to be extremely controlled, and I suspect that mystery writers have to know who did it,
and I'd rather not know the end of my books.
The other thing that I've tried my hand at is historical fiction, and I find, again, that's a straight jacket,
because you're rather well-held with what happened, whether or not it makes artistic sense.
So just for the sheer pleasure of writing, I prefer science fiction.
Okay. Was it Donnie Holheim that published that first book?
Yes, it was.
Have you established any contact or made any attempts, or was that the first one that you'd sent out?
You mean with other publishing houses and what have you?
No, with Don Holheim.
Well, actually, I grew fascinated with Holheim as an editor,
because I had gone through my library finally after seven years of trying to sell things,
and I thought, well, there must be a system to this. You see, I had no professional help at all.
And I began searching my library to see what editor had published the majority of works and writers that I liked,
figuring that we might have something in common as far as taste goes.
So I began researching Don Holheim to see what his preferences were, where we differed and where we were similar.
And so I began to conclude more and more that we were fairly well-synthetic when it came to taste.
Not quite the same all the way down the line, but generally there's a broad area of overlap.
So I found him very easy to work with.
Okay. I just had one more question on your back end and so forth.
Do you identify or do you think there are any influences, either writers or anything in your back?
I guess in terms of science fiction writers, did any, had any influence on you in the way you write?
Well, it's very difficult to put a, to pin it down, because I am one of the most Catholic science fiction writers, readers you're likely to find.
I read everything I can get my hands on and always have. I'm a speed reader.
But classically speaking, I suppose that Publius Virgilius Marrow is one of the outstanding influences on my writing,
simply because he's one writer that I spent an enormous amount of time with, at least historically speaking, when I was doing my studies.
In terms of science fiction writers that have had a great deal of influence on me, I can remember some of the early works that I read were
Heinlein Asimov, Norton, Harry Bates, Howard, Robert Howard.
It was very difficult in the town that I grew up in to find any science fiction. Jack Williamson was one.
And Edgar Rice Burroughs and so on.
I, by the time that, you see, I kept getting run out of the store, they would locate a juvenile back there in the science fiction section,
and immediately they would begin to suggest that possibly I should be looking at the Dick and Jane novels somewhere else.
And so I did have a little difficulty both in library and in bookstores trying to get out with science fiction books undetected.
Okay. You said you, I think you said you'd sent out or written Brothers of Earth before Gate of Ibrail,
but I still wanted to ask why you so early got into writing the, I guess I would call it heroic fantasy.
I'm not sure that's how you'd identify the Gate of Ibrail, but why did you sort of begin with that kind of a?
Well, I didn't. They weren't the first books that I had written.
There are others which are tentative efforts that didn't pan out in one way or another.
Everybody, I won't say everybody, but a majority of writers tend to have them.
My first love is really technology.
The only thing is that I had been out of the technological mainstream while they had made numerous scientific advances that I was not current with.
And it annoys me a great deal to feel that I'm writing something that is not technically accurate, or that I have glossed over something.
It irritates me personally to postulate, well, for instance, we have a gravity field here which keeps everyone's feet on the deck.
I want to know how it works.
So consequently, I wrote heroic fantasy while I was doing a great deal of reading in Scientific American.
Also, heroic fantasy is an area where I have a good deal of expertise since I have a major in Classics, History, Archaeology, Anthropology, this sort of thing.
But I had always been a sort of a hobbyist, and a little more than a hobbyist since it was one of my fields in the history of technology.
Okay, I'm not sure I'm going to pronounce some of these names right, so after I hear you pronounce them, we'll get them right when we do the show.
All right.
I guess it's more game.
I still have a little puzzlement about her.
Was she a creature or a force existing before the call, or the call?
I'm not sure how that's pronounced.
The call.
Well, actually, there's some of this that I am not about to give away as regards to the history of more game because that gets into the possibility of a book that I'm working on at the moment.
The first set of the books, the gate books, involve much more the character of Vanya, who is a medieval man.
I have to take his viewpoint, or they cease to be heroic fantasy and they begin to be a science fiction novel, pure and simple, because Morgaine is far more technologically sophisticated than he is.
And if it were told from her viewpoint, it would begin to be a thing of numbers and calculus.
Morgaine is far more advanced exactly where she comes from and what she is.
I've referred to leave to the to the reader's estimation.
Although I will say that your your surmises are fairly well down the center.
OK, that's why I wasn't sure.
I thought maybe I missed something.
I thought you were being a little ambiguous.
It is deliberately vague.
Partially because the character of Morgaine has evolved as I've done it.
Also partially because I have wished to keep those books as heroic fantasy.
For the reason that the technology of the gates is so vague that, again, I prefer to know how things work.
And since that one is far more fantastical than some of the other technology I work with, I prefer to keep it in the realm of fantasy.
OK, you also just said that you might be working where you are working on some more books that might involve that material.
I was going to ask, did you, when you started the first book, did you have the idea of a trilogy?
No. Actually the first book quit where it quit.
Except that they had been entered into the books in print as a series, which rather surprised me.
And so I thought, well, why not?
For a little while I found it relaxing, and to a certain extent still do, to alternate both my reading and my writing of hard tech with fantasy.
Because I do produce at an enormous rate compared to some other writers who may labor one or two years on a book.
Well, a good deal of anyone working on a book for one or two years is not writing time, it's thinking time.
And because physically to write it down takes a precious little while, you can write any given book down in less than a month.
You can just think of that.
So I found that to give my imagination a rest, as it were, it does really help to shift gears between books.
That's why I tend to do things which are radically different one from the other.
I may worry over a similar theme. I may do it once in science fiction and once in fantasy.
Thus providing endless amusement or fodder for reviewers who are trying to find some sort of a common theme.
Well, basically it's just that I just finished working with that and it was still rattling around in my head.
I did it in a different medium, just as an artist may tend to paint a lot in blue because that's the color they had last on their palette.
I don't think there's any particularly deep significance to some of these similarities,
just that some of the works were done in sort of opposition to each other, different types, different styles.
Was there any reader response that made you continue with that series?
Well, there has been a great deal of reader response.
I think that it's a very... I had a great deal of fun writing it.
I look back on it and decide I had a great deal of fun writing it.
Sometimes the character of Morgaine irritated me so much that I was just about ready to give up, throw in the towel while I was creating it.
I think I tend to sympathize much more with Vanya.
But yes, there has been a very strong reader response to it and I've always had a really great affection for this trilogy myself.
It's one of the few works that I have really felt that I could go back to and possibly do another three books.
Usually, when you've written enough... when you've written three books on anything, you tend to be burned out on it.
Because while the reader may devour it in a single night or series of nights and it's gone for the writer,
you had to live with it constantly for the better part of the year on each segment.
So for some curious reason, the Morgaine books are one of the only ones that I really find easy to return to.
Okay, you mentioned that Vanya was a medieval man and of course heroic fantasy.
I guess a lot of the elements that would go back to the medieval formulas.
But it seems to me that you have in some ways reversed the normal formula in making the heroic part of the book,
a woman and her, I don't know what you'd want to call her, not sidekick but her helper, I guess the male.
I heard some readers respond that they were not surprised at that, but it was a little unusual to have the male in that position.
Well, I think that it's... there is of course literary tradition for it.
The notion of courtly love, I suppose, is one possibility.
There is also the fact that in terms of the age at which those characters were created,
I had really conceived both characters when I was about probably fourteen.
And again, I think a reason why it's much easier for me to return to those,
because they almost come out of my extreme youth and I suppose one always has an affection for things of that sort.
They are sort of archetypal with us.
But in one form or another, they are very early creations of mine.
And as such, that was the time at which I was really just beginning to toy with being able to do male characters at all.
Of course, there was the version that is in print was done completely separate from any of the earlier works.
I didn't look at or refer to the earlier works when I did this, when I did Gate of Ibrell.
I just sort of remembered it a long time ago.
But I suppose that's the reason that the characters formed the way they did.
There's also the fact that I think that artistically, to me, made a fairly interesting story
in terms of the relationship between the two characters.
And I think that's the fact that Zanya's besetting sin, if you will, is arrogance, pride, and temper.
And if you can conceive of any situation for a medieval man in which arrogance, pride, and temper are going to get a little frayed,
it's this sort of situation.
Okay. I'm going to go ahead and move on to a whole new topic.
I think one of the things that impressed me the most, and I'm sure it impresses most of your readers greatly,
is your construction of alien cultures.
And I was curious as to whether you use models or analogs for them, or do you create them out of thin air?
Yes and no, and both.
One of my areas of study, as before mentioned, is anthropology.
I've also done a great deal of study in ecology, biology, genetics,
although strictly as an amateur in that field because it is a very complex one.
And in a way, I do take some items from the knowledge that I have of earthly animals, cultures, communities, ecosystems, and so on.
But most of my knowledge of human culture is, again, rather strange in that I know the prehistoric or Bronze Age,
that whole span, up to the Iron Age, much better than I do, say, later periods.
So a great deal of what I know about human history is so basic or lies so far back down the time track
that a divergence from what happened at any given point is going to produce massive alterations in an urban culture much further along the line.
Consequently, for instance, when I did the Fated Sun novels, which are basically a desert culture,
I did not pattern it off any modern desert culture about which I know, frankly, nothing.
I patterned it strictly by taking what I know about desert survival.
And earlier nomadic cultures here on earth contrived a biology that would work under the extreme conditions that I postulated
and then drew elements from here and there.
It's very strange that I now get letters from people that say that it very closely resembles a modern terrestrial nomadic culture.
But this is strictly a surprise to me. I suppose it just says that I knew something about the variation from it.
Okay. Why does, I guess in many of your books, I would even say the majority,
you somehow in the book have a theme or a motif of alien-human closeness.
You know, sometimes your humans have actually become part of an alien civilization. If they don't, at least they become very close to it.
Why does that fascinate you so much?
Well, partly I suppose it's what I said earlier, that one tends to toss one idea around until you've got that color completely off your palette.
I don't know how long it will continue to fascinate me. I suppose there's a limit to how much one can say about any given thing.
And not all of my novels involve aliens. Among those novels I count some that are not yet published, but are only partially complete.
If I say that I have about 13 works in progress at the moment, you may understand.
So what is on the stands is sort of the tip of the iceberg, at least as far as my body of work.
But indeed I do a great deal of it. I think part of the fascination for it lies in the fact that I myself have been a lifelong student of cultures.
And if there's anything that I can conceive of that is slightly stranger than being lost in Greece and unable to speak the local dialect,
it's being lost somewhere else and in even worse shape and managed, managing to survive it.
It pleases me also because it is a type of conflict that one can develop that does not involve necessarily everyone taking sides, lining up, and starting to shoot at each other.
Although this sometimes does happen. It is a way to, it's sort of like the Man Against Nature story.
You can have a very exciting story about a man who is simply trying to survive in a hostile environment.
Well, some environments don't involve icebergs, they involve cities. They involve cultures that you've never met before.
And I do hope, just as a matter of practical philosophy, that one thing this age of ours has begun to produce is an understanding in the human race
that we can not only get along with each other, we can get along with other creatures on the same planet.
Perhaps it is the final lesson that any species learns before they are fit to set foot in space.
At least I hope this is the case, which may guarantee the peaceful intention of potential neighbors.
I think you've sort of answered my next question, which was going to be if you deliberately counterpointed alien and human cultures.
You just suggested there would be a value to that. That we should learn to live with other species and so forth.
That would be a fair statement that you do counterpoint?
Yes. One of the most difficult things on the face of the earth, for instance, is for two people who do not speak each other's language well to communicate.
It's also certainly true, as diplomats have discovered for centuries, that you can speak someone else's language perfectly and still have trouble getting your point across.
Simply because language extends into time, history, and accumulated meanings as well as it does just the present meanings which are contained in the dictionary.
The context and history have a great bearing on language.
So that when you begin to talk about the difficulties of communicating species to species where you may even have a totally different psychology, your problems are much more severe.
It is also an area of ongoing research in the scientific community.
The studies that are done with primates, the studies that are done with dolphins and with whales.
Mankind as a whole, outside of the science fiction field, is finally beginning to wake up to the fact that you do not necessarily have to think like a human being to be, quote, intelligent.
That intelligence is a function of many different things.
Anyone who has ever taught in school will rapidly come to the conclusion that intelligence is not a quantity that can be neatly assessed.
It has to do with spatial perceptions in relationships, with the ability to compare and to analyze.
Human intelligence is made up of many, many different factors.
One may be particularly gifted in one or more of them, not so gifted in others, and it makes for a great range of abilities.
Even more so when you're dealing with different species who may have completely different environments, whose visual range may be different.
Some may see, for instance, into the infrared.
Some may hear sounds which are not audible, so on and so forth, just biologically speaking.
So you may have a psychology and a history that are very, very different from anything that we're anticipating simply because of a biological barrier.
Okay, I guess I'll just move on to a question, questions on a few of your works.
Obviously I'm not going to be able to hit all of your works. We don't have time to do that, but there were a few of them I wanted to single out.
I think it's pronounced the pride of Chonur.
Okay, let me just ask you this question first of all. Is it the honey?
Honey, yes.
I somehow see the impression their society, their physical makeup was in some ways based on lions.
Yes, absolutely. This is one case where I've taken the species of lions and in a very simple way devised a culture of an advanced species which very closely parallels the biological barrier.
The psychology and, if you will, social patterns of a lion pride. The title of the book, of course, is a three-way pun.
Meaning the pride of lions, the pride of the race, and the name of the ship?
And the ship, yes. All of which are involved together.
And also that would be why the females are the ones who go spacefaring and the males stay at home.
Yes, among the lions you will notice it is the females who do the hunting.
Okay, I'm proud of myself. Tali, the human in that book.
Of course, he is totally alone. He's a very pitiful creature, the only one of his kind, I guess, until near the end of the book.
Very unheroic. It's a while, all of a sudden I realize I'm reading the book from an alien point of view and here's a human being and I'm feeling sorry for him, which is unusual.
I guess that was just for the line of the story. Do you do that on purpose, to give us a different perspective on humanity?
Have you ever seen a baboon react to a leopard?
No.
Well, it's raw terror. A primate's nervous system is not really set up to be setting in the center of a pride of lions.
It's really one of the most unkind things I believe that you could do to a human being as far as social patterns would be to drop them right into the middle of a feline culture.
Because the moves are all wrong. For instance, Tali, being a primate, smiles.
And of course, this is exactly the wrong thing to do. You know what a lion does when it smiles. It's not a friendly gesture.
Every gesture he makes is wrong. Every gesture they make is wrong, at least as far as he's concerned.
He is, however, a very heroic human being, if you just simply analyze what he has done.
He has managed to survive a very horrendous situation.
He has managed to collect himself with some dignity out of a situation which would have broken drastically.
Any average individual would have definitely come out of it damaged.
He's been forced to take horrendous decisions, and he's been dumped into a situation where even his personal value is of some question.
And yet he manages to stand up on his signed seat and confront the honey captain with a here I am, come and see if you can do something about it kind of attitude,
which is of course what wins the captain's respect in the beginning.
He calms down a little bit, as you will see when he begins trying to deal with them, doing what any sensible person would do when confronted with a situation where you suspect that the beings around you are at least essentially friendly,
and there's no need provoking something that would be a total misunderstanding.
So he does remain a little bit quiet, but he's quiet partially because he's smart and is trying to absorb more data than he gives out.
Okay, I see that now. I suppose, yeah, in terms of where he was, I guess he was sort of a courageous individual.
Let me move on for just a second to Down Below Station.
The plotting and the setting of that novel impressed me a great deal.
Did you use a strict extrapolation to devise the society and the company and the merchants and the way you set that book up?
Yes, I follow the NASA reports.
I'm a great supporter of the space program and I do follow it very, very closely.
And one of the things that has always interested me is the economic mechanisms, the reason for going into space, the reason for colonization.
I also recall being caught some rather inaccurate things when I was back in summer school about the altruistic motives for colonization.
To hear some of the old tales I heard, the Greeks all went out and colonized the Mediterranean just because it was there,
or just because they felt it would be a noble thing to do, which is very far from the truth. It was economic necessity.
And they were, many of them were getting out of Greece because the pressures at home were incredible.
In this particular instance, I simply took the situation that we presently have and as a background for the novel,
I simply extrapolated our present situation forward a couple of hundred years.
And this is pretty well what I see going on based on modern economic necessity and a little bit of altruism in the sense that science and science for the sake of science will continue.
If you like, we've already launched the first star probes. Our problem is that right now we haven't got the budget or the research to enable them to do a loop and come back to us.
But I imagine that early in the next century there will be such probes launched.
Was that book more difficult to plot and harder to write than your others?
It was a bear. It really was. I think because it was sort of a collection of all the things that I had been trying to do up to that point,
all the research, all the reading that I had been doing in trying to rationalize this universe of mine, to give it some sort of scientific accuracy.
The one thing you have to grant me is faster than light travel. Everything else I designed is at least within near reach of our capabilities.
The plot is necessarily complex because we're dealing here with the future of the human race.
The human race is actually the character in this novel in one odd sense.
There are a number of specimens of it who are not too nice.
Fortunately, there are some who are, at least in my own estimation, good people.
The novel follows the activities of a great many of them at a very hazardous moment for humanity,
that at which part of humanity is literally breaking free of Earth, never to come back again,
in which another portion of humanity is trying to retain their heritage and to try to reach an accommodation between what they were and what they are,
and manage to deal with the new realities that they're meeting at the same time.
This probably isn't a fair question to ask an author. I've had a number of them say, make up your own mind.
In terms of who you side with, if you side with anybody, I identified more with Signe Mallory than anybody in the book.
Would that be anywhere near what you intended?
To a certain extent, yes. Signe Mallory is a very enigmatic individual in some ways.
She's difficult, even for her creator, to get a handle on.
There are a number of things going on with her.
To a certain extent, it disturbs me that she is as heroic as she is,
because when you analyze what she does, you really have to line her up on the side of the not nice people.
On the other hand, if you got into an argument with her on morality,
she would point to the morality that created the ghastly situation on the station and ask who got the better results.
Mallory is forever dealing in very, very uncomfortable paradoxes.
Often, even the author does not like what Mallory does,
but sometimes it is the most direct solution that saves the greatest number of lives.
She is, as I say, sort of an uncomfortable figure.
As that history of that world develops in subsequent books,
I think it will become clear that Mallory's influence persists among those people,
and it is not always a wholesome one.
Mallory as Mallory can be a very palatable, very appealing individual.
The problem is that some people persist in following her policies and come to less happy results.
So it is a kind of a novel that lays the foundation for a good many things.
For instance, the security organization in The Fated Son, the rather sinister Vegas, I believe his name is,
several centuries down the road, Mallory's creation.
Okay, that's interesting. I was just going to move on to that.
Let me give you one more question on Down Below Station.
Well, in fact, it applies to Fated Son too, and a couple of your other books.
You've already mentioned the fact that we have to give you the faster-than-light travel.
Still, concerning the so-called jump and the, say, the space battles in Down Below Station,
I don't think I've read any more convincing space battles than those.
And the faster-than-light travel, the jump and so forth, you didn't make any attempt at all to,
and I guess you can't back it up or prove anything there, but there was enough science behind that,
or enough, I don't know how you did it, where it was convincing.
Well, I worked very hard at it. I always loved Doc Smith.
And one of the things that I always felt that I would like to bring back to the field of science fiction,
if I could, was the space yarn.
I mean, for a long time now, science fiction, we've been on planets, we've built cities,
we've gotten so earthbound that a lot of the romance of space flight itself has gone unexpressed in literature.
And I wish to be able to develop a mechanism which would enable me to write,
oddly enough, after working my brains out on it,
this simple kind of story that I used to enjoy when I was young.
And I suddenly realized that I was in it to my neck in relativistic time, all sorts of things.
One of the things that fascinated me when I began to work out the battles,
and even there I took some shortcuts, as anyone who wants to get in and argue it,
I will freely admit that there were some things I had to do for artistic value.
But one of the things that I began to discover was that in terms of being on one of those ships in the battle,
that suddenly in a very practical way I was up against the Einsteinian stoppage of time.
Because when you are traveling near sea, near the speed of light,
aboard one of those ships, all time has stopped.
You exist at one moment, traveling forever.
If you send a message, it can go no faster than you do.
You and that message will arrive at the same time.
So essentially you exist in a frozen segment of time,
an event horizon which is perpetuating itself across the system in which you're operating.
And I began to find that a rather mind-bending concept,
particularly when I was trying to plot out the strategy.
You know, if your enemy exists as an event horizon and you exist as another one,
how thickens you going to figure out where he is?
Okay, listen, David has to flip the tape about.